Transcriber: Francesca Sacco
Reviewer: Queenie Lee
Today, I'm going to be talking about
a theory you've never heard of,
and hopefully by the end of it,
you'll think, as I do,
that it really is something
that nobody talks about,
and yet it has changed the world
and continues to change the world.
It's called the Hamitic hypothesis.
It's an idea that developed
over hundreds of years,
became very popular in the 19th century,
but continues to affect parts
of the world today, particularly Africa.
It's the subject of a book
that I've written,
that will be coming out
in a couple of months,
called The Lost White Tribe:
Explorers, Scientists,
and the Theory that Changed a Continent.
This story -
Well, I should tell you,
I'm a historian of exploration,
and that's my job.
I look at explorers, expeditions,
and cultural encounters
with people around the world,
and why people think these expeditions
are so important, back home.
And this story of the lost white tribe,
which I'm going to be talking about,
and the Hamitic hypothesis,
really grew out of a book
I wrote about ten years ago
called The Coldest Crucible,
and that was about Arctic exploration.
And in a way, I never would have imagined
that this book about the Arctic
would have led me to the project
I'm working on now,
because this book is about the Arctic,
and the Hamitic hypothesis
is really about Africa,
but it actually grew out of part
of that earlier topic.
I was writing about Arctic exploration.
I was particularly interested
in American explorers,
and how in the 1800's,
American explorers found it
so interesting to go to the Arctic,
a really dangerous place.
Many dozens of Americans
lost their lives going there,
either to try to find a Northwest Passage
or to get to the North pole.
But I found this story of one explorer,
his name was Vilhjalmur Stefansson,
and he went to the Arctic,
not to try to get to the North pole,
but to find undiscovered peoples.
While he was in the upper region of Canada
in a place called Victoria Island,
he discovered a group of Inuit,
which he described when he came back
as being blond, of being
what he called blond Eskimos.
I thought this was the most bizarre story,
but I could not stop reading about it.
There were stories
all over the US at the time.
In fact, the worldwide press
took up the story
of the Blonde Eskimos of Victoria Island.
Some people thought
it was a complete fake,
that it was a hoax.
Other people thought
it was an amazing kind of discovery
that needed to be explained.
But I had nothing that I could do with it,
it had no part to play
in the story I was telling.
So I tucked it away in a file,
and what I found was
that over the next six years or so,
I started finding more and more
kind of stories of these white tribes
that people had discovered
all over the world.
So for example, in Panama,
Richard Marsh finds a group
that he calls the white Indians.
In Central Asia,
there is a group of people who said
they found Tibetans who looked Aryan.
In parts of Africa, people
were finding white tribes as well.
And in Japan, people discovered
in the late 19th century,
a group called the Ainu
in the northern island of Japan,
which they said looked like Caucasians.
So, by the time I got to about 2008,
I had this giant file of kind of weird
white tribe discoveries,
and I figured now is the time
to do something with it.
But there was one story in particular
that I was interested in,
and that was the story of a discovery
that took place
in East Africa in the 1870s -
in that red box you see there.
It happened just to the west
of Lake Victoria,
one of the largest lakes in the world,
and it was made by a very
famous explorer, Henry Morton Stanley.
Now, Stanley may have been familiar to you
as the guy who discovers Livingstone,
or rescues Livingstone,
in the heart of Africa in 1869.
In fact, the phrase
"Dr. Livingstone, I presume?"
was supposedly something that Stanley
said to Livingstone when they met.
This was one of the most famous
expeditions of the 19th century.
But, Stanley went back to Africa
and went back many times,
and on his subsequent
expedition to Africa,
he went not to find Livingstone,
but to try to discover
the source of the Nile.
People knew by the late 1800s
that there were many lakes
in the areas of East Africa,
what we call the Rift Valley
of East Africa,
and that one of these lakes
would have been the source of the Nile,
something that geographers
had been searching for, for 2,000 years.
But Stanley said, "I'm going to figure out
which of these lakes it actually is."
So he treks into East Africa,
and he determines with great confidence
that Lake Victoria
is the ultimate source of the Nile,
4,000 miles of Nile River,
and that is the source.
But what he also discovers is something
that in a sense creates a new mystery,
which is he finds that there are
members of an African soldier force
that are protecting him, which look white,
and he calls them
"Greeks in white shirts."
He can't believe how
light complected these Africans are.
He asks other members
of his expedition party,
"Who are these men?"
and they say, "They come
from the mountains to the West
on a mountain called Gambaragara."
So he writes about this
and sends these reports back home,
and the illustrations of his narrative
actually show Mount Gambaragara
over on the left-hand side
of the illustration,
you can see it in the background.
This became a huge story, back home,
this lost white race that Stanley
had found in the heart of Africa.
How in God's name
would Stanley have explained this
in the late 18th century?
What kind of theoretical background
could people use or information?
Why you would find a group of white people
living in the heart of Africa?
In fact, Stanley,
very much as a man of the 1800s,
was at this transition moment
between people who use the Bible as a way
of explaining the history of the world
and people who use science as a way
of explaining the history of the world.
So when Stanley thought about it,
he actually looked back
to the Middle Ages,
when people tried
to explain the differences
that we saw in the peoples of the world,
what we would call racial differences,
and look to the stories of Genesis,
in particular the story of Noah.
And in the story of Noah,
we all know about Noah and the flood,
but a lot of people don't know
what happened after the flood,
which was Noah parks the Arch
on the top of Mount Ararat,
disembarks with his family
as well as his three sons,
Sem, Japheth, and Ham.
And it was really these three sons
that many people in the Middle Ages -
by that, we're talking about
Jews, Christians, and Muslims -
all look to this story
as a kind of explanation
for how the world got repopulated
after it was annihilated in Genesis 9.
And as you see here,
this is a medieval map
showing the three sons of Noah
on the three known
continents of the world.
Asia, on the top - you see
the little arch there at the very top,
hanging out on the top of Ararat.
And Sem, the base of the word Semitic
comes from Sem, Noah's son.
And then in the bottom
left corner is Europe -
this map is rotated east, by the way.
On the bottom left, you see,
Europe, and that's Japheth.
And then the forerunner
of all Africans, people thought,
were the descendants of Ham.
So when Stanley talks
about this white tribe, he says,
"Somehow they must
be related to the tribe of Ham,"
and they became known as Hamites.
But this was a transition point.
And Stanley was a very smart man;
he was also not just reading his Bible,
he was also reading Darwin,
and he was reading Charles Lyell,
who were beginning to, in a sense,
dismantle a kind of
biblical history of the world.
Guys like Darwin and Lyell said,
"The world was not 6,000 years old;
it's hundreds of thousands of years old" -
they had no idea how old it really was.
But it was very, very old,
and in addition to that,
species maybe didn't stay fixed over time,
maybe species changed over time,
maybe in fact, human beings
were once resembled something else.
So Stanley began
to try to adopt these old ideas
and graph them to new ideas.
And a lot of other people
at that time did as well.
Strangely enough, the Hamitic hypothesis,
this idea that all Africans
came from the descendants of Ham,
that son of Noah,
somehow got weirdly flipped
to "No, Hamites are not all Africans,
Hamites are some invasion of white people
that happened in the ancient past,
and that this invasion of white people
explains why we are finding
white tribes all over the world."
Now, if this sounds a little bizarre,
let me kind of reinforce.
This was not some wacky idea, like,
you know, scientists
who go looking for Sasquatch
or people trying to prove ColdFusion.
This was anthropologists,
linguists, paleontologists,
all kinds of scientists
from across the spectrum
were interested in this.
This is a map, for example,
of an anthropologists
named Griffith Taylor,
who is actually trying
to describe what he saw
as the racial dispersion of groups
out of Asia around the world.
Now you look, and it kind of
looks like a swirling map,
but just to orient you here,
the middle of the map is Asia.
And as you see,
there are these kind of initial flows
outward of darker races.
Now, Griffith Taylor believed
that the first races
of the human species were primitive,
and that the later races
of the species were more advanced.
And like most 19th century Europeans
and North Americans,
when they thought
about primitive and advanced,
they saw it also as a racial ladder,
and that primitive meant dark skinned
and advanced meant light skinned.
So they created a kind of
color map of the world:
to give you another example,
he called this the Lava Flow analogy,
that all of the races of the human species
emerged first in Asia,
and then gradually,
the later, more advanced, races -
i.e. the white race -
kind of rolled over the other races
and spread itself out
as it conquered and overcame
and drove to the edges
the darker raced peoples of the world,
either intermarrying with them
or conquering them.
So this was the idea
that could somehow explain
why you would find
white tribes in weird areas.
It also happened to fit very nicely
with what was happening
in the late 19th century,
which was new white tribes were taking
over other places in the world.
Europeans were madly scrambling
for colonial possessions
from Asia to Africa.
In fact, this map of Africa
from the late 19th century
shows, essentially, the color codes here
are different color codes
for European countries:
brown is France, green is Great Britain,
blue is Belgium, and purple is Germany.
Literally, all of Africa had been
carved up by European countries
as they tried to grab colonies.
So, the idea that there had been
white ancestors who had done this before
kind of fit the mode
of European thinking at the time,
and as European colonists
came into these parts of Africa,
and they looked at various
groups of Africans, they said,
"These are the Hamites;
these are the proto-white people.
Let's treat them slightly different
than these people that we think of
as being black African."
So, over the course
of the late 19th century,
some groups, like the Bahima,
the Batusi of Rwanda,
the Nyamwezi of Tanzania
were called white,
and other groups were called,
like the Bahutu of Rwanda,
were called black.
Now, at the time,
Africans themselves did not have
the same idea of racial concept, right?
They thought mostly
in terms of ethnic or clan terms,
and yet, these ideas caught on.
And it also allowed Europeans
and North Americans,
when they looked at the great kind of
legacy of African civilizations,
when they looked, for example,
at Great Zimbabwe or the great Pyramids,
they said, "Clearly, black cultures
couldn't have created these.
These must have been the Hamites, right?
Those ancient,
highly advanced white invaders
who were here thousands of years ago.
So this Hamitic hypothesis
became a way of explaining,
justifying, white colonization,
as well as all of this cool stuff
that you find in Africa,
and that was essentially taken away
from Africans themselves.
There is a very dark side
to the Hamitic hypothesis as well,
which is this:
even after Europeans
left Africa in the 1960s
and these countries became independent,
even after the Hamitic hypothesis
essentially was exploded
as not being true,
even after that time
Africans themselves had started
to adapt and adopt the Hamitic hypothesis
as a part of their own history.
So for example, the Batusi of Rwanda
considered themselves
as having an origin outside of Africa,
and other groups in Africa as well.
The Iraqw of Tanzania see themselves
as having a Mediterranean origin,
not an African one.
And this racial conflict
between the two groups
was something that became important
in the Rwandan genocide of 1994.
It was much easier for the Hutu
to see the Batusi as foreign,
as literally non-African invaders
of their own country,
and made it that much easier for them
to exterminate them.
I'm not saying that's the only reason
for the Rwandan genocide,
but it was one of the important factors.
So that's the sad part of the story.
But there's another part
and I want to end on this other part,
which is an interesting part of the story,
which is we really haven't actually gotten
back to the original question,
which was: if these things aren't true,
if Stanley wasn't actually seeing
white people in the heart of Africa,
then what was he seeing?
So I went to Africa in 2013,
and I actually climbed that mountain
that Stanley was looking at,
which I was totally unprepared for.
I mean, I run; I thought
I was in pretty good shape,
but this mountain is 17,000 feet high!
There is a glacier on the top of it,
and I wasn't really prepared for that.
But here I am before I got to that point.
(Laughter)
And I wanted to see, as I told my guide,
I wanted to see what Stanley saw,
and my guide, who was a member
of the Bakonzo tribe, he looked at me
and said: "There's no white people
on the top of that mountain, man."
(Laughter)
And I said, "I know that there aren't."
But I want to think about
what Stanley saw.
I came up with a provisional hypothesis,
and the provisional hypothesis is this:
I think Stanley did see difference;
I think he did look at people and said,
"These people do not look
anything like these people."
We now know that in terms
of human diversity,
Africa is the most diverse
continent in the world.
There's more human diversity,
i.e. physical diversity, in Africa
than any other place
because within Africa is a much longer
evolutionary period of time
for the human species than outside of it.
So I think he did see human difference,
and then it was filtered through -
this is my own theory,
and I'm very proud of it -
it filtered what I call
the Mr. Magoo Hypothesis.
(Laughter)
So for those of you who are too young
to remember Mr. Magoo,
he was this Don Quixote-like figure
who was so nearsighted
that you would stick him in a room,
and he wouldn't really know where he was,
and he thought he was somewhere else,
but everything that he, like,
bumped into or knocked into,
he interpreted as if he
was in that other place
because his expectations
of where he was were so strong
it filtered virtually
all information coming in.
And I think that almost all explorers -
probably all tourists -
suffer from the Mr. Magoo hypothesis,
which is that they too, in a sense,
filter everything they see
through their expectations
of what they should see.
And I think Stanley, in a sense,
wanted to see people
who were like him, who were European.
He was a desperately lonely man;
he was living in Africa for three years,
oftentimes without anyone else
from Europe or North America,
and I think in a sense,
he wanted to identify with people
and saw this difference - cheekbones,
aquiline nose, lighter skin color -
and traced that as white.
Ultimately, to finish it off, why should
we remember this strange hypothesis?
OK. It was a kind of inkblot test
for the way people looked at the world.
But ultimately, I think we should
remember the Hamitic hypothesis
because when we think about
master races and Aryan domination,
we think about kind of the very short,
very violent history of Nazi Germany,
but in fact, there was a much longer
and a much more profound racial theory
that continues to exist today,
and that is the Hamitic hypothesis.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)